---
layout: ../../../layouts/BlogLayout.astro
title: The Impact of Tech Debt
---

# The Impact of Tech Debt

[//]: # (Matthew Burkard / 1:29 PM EST â€¢ July 22, 2023)

In the world of software development, the concept of "Tech Debt" has become a crucial
topic of discussion. It refers to the consequences of taking shortcuts or compromising
on the quality of code during the development process. While it may appear to speed up
the initial progress of a project, tech debt can lead to long-term issues that impact
the overall efficiency, maintainability, and safety of the codebase. In this article, we
will delve into the implications of tech debt and explore the balance between speed and
clean code.

#### Speed vs. Cleanliness: The False Dichotomy

One common misconception in the software development community is the belief that speed
and clean code are conflicting objectives. The prevailing argument suggests that
prioritizing speed may require taking shortcuts, leading to a less organized and less
maintainable codebase. However, this is only true in the shortest terms, it takes very
little time for tech debt to drain the momentum of a project. Writing clean code,
adhering to proper development practices, and following coding standards results in a
more efficient and effective development process in the long run. Clean code reduces the
likelihood of bugs and makes it easier for developers to understand, modify, and extend
the codebase.

#### More Hidden Costs of Messy Code

The consequences of tech debt are not always immediately apparent but have significant
long-term impacts on a software project. Some of the hidden costs associated with a
messy codebase include:

###### 1. Stagnating Project Progress

A messy codebase slows down the development process. Implementing new features or
fixing bugs becomes a cumbersome task, as changing one part of the codebase may
inadvertently break others. This creates a never-ending cycle of addressing issues,
creating a "bug whack-a-mole" situation, hindering the project's progress and
scalability.

###### 2. Employee Engagement, Satisfaction, and Retention

Developers working with a poorly maintained and chaotic codebase often experience
frustration and dissatisfaction. The lack of clear structure and the constant struggle
with bugs can demotivate team members, leading to decreased engagement and for the
company, lower retention rates. Writing clean code contributes to a more positive and
rewarding work environment, fostering a sense of pride and ownership in the project.

##### Safety Concerns

Apart from hindering development and impacting team dynamics, tech debt can also pose
safety risks to software projects. Two significant safety concerns associated with messy
code are:

###### 1. Exploitation

Vulnerabilities introduced by poorly written code can expose software to security
breaches and exploitation. Hackers may take advantage of weak points in the codebase to
gain unauthorized access, steal sensitive data, or disrupt the application's
functionality.

###### 2. Bugs

Messy code inevitably results in a higher number of bugs and errors, which leads to
unexpected behavior, crashes, or malfunctions. Identifying and resolving these issues
is challenging and time-consuming, diverting valuable resources away from new feature
development and optimization. Do you want to employ developers whose sole job is fixing
the bugs resulting from the mess?

#### Refactors and Continued Relevance

Embracing legacy code for too long is a hindrance when technology evolves and the
software landscape changes as it rapidly does. While legacy code might have served its
purpose in the past, becoming too attached to it results in problems. The amount of work
required to upgrade legacy grows with interest as it remains unaddressed. The more usage
that is made of outdated libraries and frameworks the more work there is to do when the
organization finally decides to address the issue.

##### Sunk Costs

Legacy code is like to a stubborn tumor that drains resources and impedes progress. The
longer it remains in place, the more resistance there will be to moving away from it.

#### Conclusion

The concept of tech debt underscores the importance of prioritizing clean code and
adhering to proper development practices. While it may seem expedient to sacrifice code
quality for speed in the short term, the long-term consequences can be detrimental to a
software project's success. By proactively addressing tech debt, software teams can
create a more efficient, secure, and maintainable codebase, fostering employee
satisfaction, and ultimately delivering a higher-quality product.

#### Call to Action

At Lautus we have a commitment to writing clean maintainable code. Lautus means clean
and elegant, it's our goal to provide future-proof software solutions without falling
into the traps that result in tech debt. Companies bleed money maintaining software
built on weak foundations. We offer premium solutions designed to be maintainable,
upgradable, performant, and secure.
