---
layout: ../../../layouts/MarkdownLayout.astro
title: Use an Open Source Tech Stack
---

# Use an Open Source Tech Stack

[//]: # (Matthew Burkard / 10:21 AM EST â€¢ July 16, 2023)

When developing software, there are many decisions to be made about the tech stack. One
of the most critical decisions to make early on is choosing a database, with plenty of
open source and proprietary options available to consider.

#### What is Open Source

Open source refers to software whose source code is made available to the public,
allowing anyone to view, use, contribute to, and distribute it. This approach stands in
contrast to proprietary software, where the source code is kept hidden from users, and
they can only access the compiled executable version.

#### Myths

##### Anyone Can View or Modify it, so it's not Secure

This is a common misconception about open source software. While it's true that the
source code is open for inspection, this transparency actually improves security. With
many developers scrutinizing the code, issues and vulnerabilities are identified and
fixed more quickly. Open source projects often have active communities that prioritize
security and collaborate to ensure a robust and stable codebase.

This myth is prevalent largely due to the
use of [FUD propaganda](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear,_uncertainty,_and_doubt)
tactics used by a certain tech giant trying push their proprietary solutions.

##### It Can't be as Good if it's not Made by a Large Company

Large open source projects such as Linux have, as a development force, a collection of
developers from all backgrounds all over the planet. Linux has 96% market share of
servers, proprietary alternatives barely compete. Open source projects can be created
and maintained by dedicated teams or communities of developers who are passionate about
the project.

##### I Can't Sue Anyone if an Open Source Tool Fails

While it's true that open source software typically comes with disclaimers and
warranties that limit the developer's liability, this should not be seen as a
disadvantage. In most cases, open source software is thoroughly tested and vetted by the
community, reducing the likelihood of critical failures. Moreover, the lack of legal
recourse can be balanced by the increased flexibility, customization, and security that
open source solutions offer. Better to never suffer a catastrophic failure than rely on
having someone to sue.

#### Advantages

##### Security

As mentioned earlier, open source software's transparency allows for a higher level of
security. The collective efforts of developers around the world lead to continuous
testing, bug fixes, and improvements. Security vulnerabilities are often patched
quickly, reducing the window of exposure to potential threats.

##### Licensing

Open source licenses come with fewer restrictions than proprietary licenses, giving
developers the freedom to use, modify, and distribute the software without being bound
by complex legal agreements. This flexibility encourages innovation.

##### Cost

The most apparent advantage of open source software is its cost-effectiveness. Open
source tools are typically free to use, which can be particularly beneficial for
startups, small businesses, or projects with limited budgets. Even for larger
enterprises, open source options can significantly reduce licensing and operational
costs.

#### Conclusion

Open source software provides numerous benefits, including enhanced security, flexible
licensing, and cost savings. Dispelling the myths surrounding open source reveals its
true potential and positions it as a preferable choice for many development projects.
Whether it's databases, programming languages, or entire operating systems, the thriving
open source community continues to shape the technology landscape and contribute to a
more inclusive and collaborative software development ecosystem.

#### Our Approach

We don't re-invent wheel, we build our software on top of the solid foundations,
developed by armies of developers, all across the world, refined and improved over the
years. This helps us provide top quality solutions while saving on operational costs.
Many organizations are paying recurring license costs believing them to be necessary
expenses. An organization looking to reduce the cost of regular operations should
consider in investing the effort to migrate off of proprietary tech stacks.
